Track changes feedback on pre-existing vaccine tech ms (#1163)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/22.vaccines-trad.md

We review vaccine technologies used for SARS-CoV-2 in two parts: here, the application of traditional vaccine development platforms to SARS-CoV-2, and separately, omics-based approaches [@individual-vaccines-novel].

Vaccine development using well-established technologies is important for a global perspective on COVID-19.
As of {{owid_most_recent_date}}, {{viper_vaccine_counts}} SARS-CoV-2 vaccines have been approved. Data tracking the administration of {{owid_vaccine_counts}} vaccines throughout the world indicates that {{owid_total_vaccinations}} doses have been administered across {{owid_total_countries}} countries [@doi:10.1038/s41562-021-01122-8].
Of these, {{viper_num_approved_subunit}} were developed using subunit and {{viper_num_approved_whole_virus}} using whole-virus approaches, which do not require information about the viral genome.
Many vaccines are available but in only a subset of countries, and the types of vaccines available varies widely throughout the world, as the process of developing and deploying a vaccine is complex and often requires coordination between government, industry, academia, and philanthropic entities [@doi:10.1126/science.abc5312].

> ![

Reviewer: Super

> <!--Do we need a wider definition of VE? For example - https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/vaccine-efficacy-effectiveness-and-protection. I ask because there has been blurred lines between whether we are trying to prevent disease or infection… which are not mutually exclusive-->

Author: ```suggestion
```
I attempted to do to this in the edits for this paragraph, below!

Reviewer: Thanks Halie

> The vaccine efficacy (VE) of a vaccine seeks to quantify the extent to which a vaccine protects against the virus.

Author: ```suggestion
The vaccine efficacy (VE) of a vaccine seeks to quantify the extent to which a vaccine protects against the virus during clinical trials [@url:https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/vaccine-efficacy-effectiveness-and-protection].
The real-world protection offered by a vaccine is referred to as its effectiveness [@url:https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/vaccine-efficacy-effectiveness-and-protection].
```

> However, protection can mean different things in different contexts.

Author: ```suggestion
Additionally, protection can mean different things in different contexts.
In general, the goal of a vaccine is to prevent disease, especially severe disease, rather than infection itself.
```

Vaccine developers also often test their candidates for serum neutralizing activity, which has been proposed as a biomarker for adaptive immunity in other respiratory illnesses [@doi:10.1056/nejmoa2022483].

> However, unlike in efforts <!--I think there might be a typo here-->to develop vaccines for prior viral threats, the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic has made it possible to test multiple vaccines in phase 3 trials where the effect of the vaccines on a cohort’s likelihood of contracting SARS-CoV-2 is evaluated.

Author: ```suggestion
However, the duration of the COVID-19 pandemic has made it possible to test multiple vaccines in phase 3 trials where the effect of the vaccines on a cohort’s likelihood of contracting SARS-CoV-2 is evaluated, whereas this has not always been feasible for other infectious diseases that have been controlled more quickly.
```

<!--Do we need a wider definition of VE? For example - https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/vaccine-efficacy-effectiveness-and-protection. I ask because there has been blurred lines between whether we are trying to prevent disease or infection… which are not mutually exclusive-->
One of the metrics through which a vaccine's success is measured is efficacy.
The vaccine efficacy (VE) of a vaccine seeks to quantify the extent to which a vaccine protects against the virus during clinical trials [@url:https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/vaccine-efficacy-effectiveness-and-protection].
The real-world protection offered by a vaccine is referred to as its effectiveness [@url:https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/vaccine-efficacy-effectiveness-and-protection].
Additionally, protection can mean different things in different contexts.

> In general, the goal of a vaccine is to prevent disease, especially severe disease, rather than infection itself.

Reviewer: This definitely clears that up.

The immune response generated by protein subunit vaccines is weaker, and adjuvants are usually required to boost the response [@doi:10.1517/14712598.2011.573624] (see Appendix).
These adjuvants are immunogenic substances, which include, for example, alum (aluminum hydroxide), squalene- or saponin-based adjuvants, and Freund’s incomplete/complete adjuvants [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.04.055; @doi:10.3390/vaccines2030515].

> Table: Subunit vaccines approved for use in at least one country [@url:https://covid19.trackvaccines.org/types-of-vaccines] as of {{csse_date_pretty}} <!--When you say approved, you mean in some countries?-->

Author: @RLordan thank you for fixing this text! It is the data from VIPER, the criterion is just approval somewhere
